README.md, before:

# Runes4Maven (r4m) Maven Extension

[![Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004](https://img.shields.io/github/license/apache/maven?label=License)](LICENSE)
[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m/r4m-maven-extension?label=Maven%20Central)](https://search.maven.org/search?q=g:%22net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m%22%20AND%20a:%22r4m-maven-extension%22)

Runes4Maven (r4m) Maven Extension enables you to specify how Maven builds your project!

This is accomplished by providing a better way for defining maven executions and<br> providing fine grained control over the execution of the Maven Lifecycle. 

## Features

- Allows running entire `Lifecycles`/`Phases` with a specific `Execution` context
<br>ex: deploy with `Execution` context for CICD-Pipeline use `deploy@pipeline`
<br>ex: if no `Execution` context is specified the default `Execution` context is used: `install` == `install@default`
- Allows running select `Phases` without implicitly executing all prerequisites
<br>ex: deploy (for example to a secondary repo) `[deploy]`
- Allows exclusion of select `Phases` on execution
<br>ex: install without testing: `]test[,install`
- Provides `Modes` for selecting which set of `Goals` is executed per `Phase`
<br>ex: install in development mode `dev/install` vs install in default mode `install` or `default/install`
- Provides `help` Lifecycle
- Provides Gui enhancements (can be disabled)
- Plugin Configurations are inherited by per Plugin Execution Configurations (inside pom.xml)
- All configurations are stored outside the maven pom to avoid bloat
  - Executions can be customized with the `pem.xml` file
  - The order of Goals inside a Phase can be customized with the `grm.xml` file
- `Execution` contexts can be automatically triggered ...
  - always
  - default (active if no other `Execution` is called for)
  - on <ins>active</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>inactive</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>provided</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>missing</ins> `Profile`
- `Execution` contexts can be restricted via ...
  - "packaging procedures" (whatever is set as the `packaging` in `pom.xml`)
  - "properties" (allows matching by existance, `equals`, `equals-ignore-case`, `regex`; `invert` of the statement)
- Provides logging of all loaded Maven-Extensions (and their states)
- Provides `setup` goal to simplify installation into maven-project
- Provides goals to dump the current configuration (in case you want to redefine everything, so you don't need to start from scratch)
- Provides debug goals
- Configurations (`pem.xml` & `grm.xml`) are loaded from all active plugins therefore Workflow Plugins can be used for easier project setup
  - RunedUniverse provides example Workflow Plugins for use with Jenkins-Plugins, Spring and normal Java Projects.
- Provides Configuration options for Runes4Maven Features (see [Properties](#properties))
- Built to be extendable by other Maven Core-Extensions

## Installation
Runes4Maven (r4m) can be installed in two major ways:

### Maven Core-Extension
Runes4Maven (r4m) installed as a Maven Core-Extensions exposes r4m's full potential.

Core-Extensions are installed in the project by adding them in the `extensions.xml`. This has to be located in the `.mvn` folder which has to be in the root folder of your maven project per [maven definition](https://maven.apache.org/configure.html#mvn-extensions-xml-file).

#### Automatic Install
To automatically install the `r4m-maven-extension`, execute the `setup` maven goal in the project folder:

```bash
mvn net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m:r4m-maven-extension:setup
```

#### Manual Install
> just place following file in the `.mvn` folder your projects root directory!

`.mvn/extensions.xml`

```xml
<extensions xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/EXTENSIONS/1.0.0"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/EXTENSIONS/1.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/core-extensions-1.0.0.xsd">
    <extension>
        <groupId>net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m</groupId>
        <artifactId>r4m-maven-extension</artifactId>
        <version>1.1.0</version>
    </extension>
</extensions>
```


### Maven Build-Extension

> [!CAUTION]
> We received reports that on some Maven versions past our min. supported version of `3.3.9` an essential class does not get provided to **Build-Extensions** anymore, which leads to Maven crashing in it's entirety!
> <br><br>
> **Therefore we urge you to load r4m as a [Core-Extension](#maven-core-extension)!**

You theoretically could use r4m as a Build-Extension,
some features may not be available in this mode and it will print a sizable warning!

To configure r4m as a build-extension, configure this extension as a plugin and set `<extensions>` flag to `true`.

(see [Maven Guide Example for Build-Extensions](https://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-using-extensions.html#build-extension)).


## Goals

Goal | Description
---|---
`r4m:help` | Prints the help-page
`r4m:help-tasks` | Prints goal/lifecycle tasks help-page. It describes how the new build argument 'lifecycle-tasks' works.
`r4m:gen-full-pem` | Discovers all loaded Executions which influence the current project build lifecycles. Discovered Executions will be condensed as much as possible and written to the `full-pem.xml` file in the defined build directory.
`r4m:gen-rel-pem` | Discovers all loaded Executions which are relevant to and influence the current project build lifecycles. Discovered Executions will be condensed as much as possible and written to the `rel-pem.xml` file in the defined build directory.
`r4m:status` | Shows the status of all r4m features.
`r4m:setup` | Configures the r4m-maven-extension as a Core-Extension.
`r4m:help-debug` | Prints the debug help-page.<br>It lists debug goals & properties which can help trace unexpected problems.
`r4m:debug-show-pem-archive` | Prints all registered PEMs.<br>The PEMs are logged as parsed, no selection has occurred!
`r4m:debug-show-grm-archive` | Prints all registered GRMs.<br>The GRMs are logged as parsed, no selection has occurred!



## Properties

Property | Default | Options | Description
---|---|---|---
`r4m.active-profiles-inheritance` | `upstream` | `upstream`, `top-level`, `false` | This property defines whether active profiles are inherited when running single modules (defined via `-pl <module>`) inside a multi-module-maven project. Since by default profiles activated via cli (`-P<profile>`) only apply to the top-level project.
`r4m.fancy-output` | `true` | `true`, `false` | Some help goals output "fancy" styled text which gets removed when logging. These goals will log in an alternate way when set to `false`.
`r4m.generate-plugin-executions` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This property defines whether missing active executions can be auto-generated. For further information see [Issue #5](https://github.com/RunedUniverse/r4m-maven-extension/issues/5#issuecomment-1618743363).
`r4m.generate-plugin-executions-on-fork` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This property defines whether missing active executions can be auto-generated when forking. For further information see [Issue #5](https://github.com/RunedUniverse/r4m-maven-extension/issues/5#issuecomment-1618743363).
`r4m.lifecycle-task-request-calculator` | `sequential` | `declared`, `sequential` | This property defines how lifecycle-tasks without modifiers get interpreted. Option `declared`   -> `<phase>` => `[<phase>]` vs option `sequential` -> `<phase>` =>  `<phase>]`.
`r4m.lifecycle-task-request-calculator-on-fork` | `sequential` | `declared`, `sequential` | This property defines how Maven default based goal forks, defining an `execute-phase`, get interpreted. Option `declared`   -> `<phase>` => `[<phase>]` vs option `sequential` -> `<phase>` =>  `<phase>]`.
`r4m.missing-build-plugin-handler` | `warn` | `skip`, `warn`, `scan`, `download` | This property defines how active goals without an active plugin definition should get handled. In case you have a plugin which requires a secondary "missing/undefined" plugin you may set this property to `scan` or `download` but be warned this slows down operation significantly. Furthermore in case you have a maven-plugin which has a secondary plugin bundled you can forceload the secondary plugin by setting this property to `scan` but again this slows down operation significantly and is **not** recommended. Please just define all required plugins!
`r4m.patch-mojo-on-fork` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This defines whether the mojos during fork can be rewritten. This 'fixes' the gui but may break other plugins which might rely on that variable downstream.
`r4m.debug.dump-grm-entries-before-execution` | `reduced` | `all`, `reduced` | Defines the level of detail, when logging the grm-selection, pre task-execution in debug mode (`-X`).


---

## Insights

Maven hides a bunch of very useful options under the hood. Additionally the Executions feature is very powerful but can be quite a hussle to configure correctly. Furthermore Maven does not provide an option to just launch one phase which might include only goals that don't require any prerequisites.

Runes4Maven (r4m) reworks two core features and adds ease of life features.
1. Activating Executions for entire lifecycle-tasks (phases)
2. Specific declaration of which phases are to run.
3. Which executions get activated?
4. Which Goals are included in which execution?
5. Selecting Goals through 'modes'
6. Where exactly is the goal order (inside a phase) defined?!
7. Help Lifecycle

---

### Lifecycle Tasks Rework [1-3]
When running Maven you append goal/lifecycle tasks to the Maven command 'mvn'.

Maven already provides the goal tasks in following style - as such they are unchanged:

`<plugin-prefix>:<goal>[@<execution>]` or `<plugin-group-id>:<plugin-artifact-id>[:<plugin-version>]:<goal>[@<execution>]`


Runes4Maven (r4m) further reworked the Lifecycle Tasks which allow following style:

`[<modes>/]<lifecycle-tasks>[@<executions>]`

##### &lt;modes&gt;
Modes are a comma separated list of active modes. By default the modes `default` and `dev` are available but you may define others within the pem.xml config.

##### &lt;lifecycle-tasks&gt;
Lifecycle Tasks are a comma separated list of active lifecycle-phases. Every Lifecycle Phase may have one additional modifier before and/or after it:

`]` or `[` `<phase>` `]` or `[`

**Modifiers**

```
   ']' before the phase:
       select all phases before the phase excluding the phase itself
   '[' before the phase:
       select all phases after the phase including the phase itself
   ']' after the phase:
       select all phases before the phase including the phase itself
   '[' after the phase:
       select all phases after the phase excluding the phase itself
```

##### &lt;executions&gt;
Executions are a comma separated list of active executions.

#### Examples

Install everything without running tests in 'dev' mode:

`dev/]test[,install]`

Run all the tests without recompiling, with the 'pipeline' execution:

`[test]@pipeline`

Package the project with the custom defined modes 'my-mode' & 'my-test-mode' and executions 'pipeline' & 'test':

`my-mode,my-test-mode/package]@pipeline,test`

---

### Project Execution Model (PEM) [4-5]
The Project Execution Model `pem.xml` can be used to override all inherited default executions and specify specific triggers, restrictions and modes for your specific usecase.
We strongly recommend not to write the PEM from scratch but to generate the currently active configuration. This can be done by running `r4m:gen-full-pem` to generate to full PEM usually around 700-1000 lines (yes Maven does inject a ton of configuration), we recommend to generate only the relevant PEM for your usecase by running `r4m:gen-rel-pem`.
Please keep in mind that the relevant PEM of the root project of a multi-module-maven project only includes the config of the root project.

The `pem.xml` has the schema header shown below, allowing you to speed up writing it with an adequate IDE (Eclipse/Intellij).

```xml
<project-execution-model
    xmlns="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem 
    https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem-v1_1_0.xsd">

    <modelVersion>1.1.0</modelVersion>
    <executions>
        ...
    </executions>
</project-execution-model>
```

Every Execution defined in the PEM can have multiple triggers. Currently following triggers are available - other core-extensions may define additional triggers:

`always`, `never`, `default`, `on-call` (this is always active), `active-profile`, `inactive-profile`, `provided-profile`, `missing-profile`


Every Execution defined in the PEM can have multiple restrictions, once a restriction type is defined at least one of those definitions has to be fulfilled. Currently following restriction is available - other core-extensions may define additional restrictions:

`packaging-procedure`, `property`

Every Goal in the PEM has to have at least one mode. By default the modes `default` and `dev` are preconfigured. This can be changed inside the `pem.xml`.

**What might I use modes for?** With modes you can have two seperate 'modes' of one execution, for example you can make it so that a formatting goal only runs in 'dev' mode and not during normal operation.

---

### Goal Requirement Model [6]
The Goal Requirement Model `grm.xml` can be used to define the order of goals. Strictly speaking this feature should not be required as Maven expects that all goals in the same phase can be executed in any order.
Sadly this is not always the case therefore we need a way to declare an order. By default this order, is the order in which the plugins are declared in the `pom.xml`, therefore the default way gets complicated very fast especially when considering project inheritance, PEM's and Workflow Plugins.

```xml
<goal-requirement-model
    xmlns="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-grm"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-grm r4m-grm-v1_0_0.xsd">

    <modelVersion>1.0.0</modelVersion>
    <goals>
        ...
    </goals>
</goal-requirement-model>
```

---

### Help Lifecycle [7]
Runes4Maven (r4m) provides the help lifecycle. With this the cmd `mvn help` is finally viable. Runes4Maven does **not** crawl build-plugins to attach their help goals to the `help` lifecycle.

But we recommend every build-plugin developer to attach their help goals to this lifecycle. In case the default Maven way does not work for you, we recommend you to include a `pem.xml` file with the same syntax as the PEM in your jar under the path `META-INF/r4m/pem.xml` and set the execution `source` field to `plugin`. You may of course also attach all your other goals to lifecycles in the same way.

Commit message:

added info for Overrides to README.md

README.md, after:

# Runes4Maven (r4m) Maven Extension

[![Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004](https://img.shields.io/github/license/apache/maven?label=License)](LICENSE)
[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m/r4m-maven-extension?label=Maven%20Central)](https://search.maven.org/search?q=g:%22net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m%22%20AND%20a:%22r4m-maven-extension%22)

Runes4Maven (r4m) Maven Extension enables you to specify how Maven builds your project!

This is accomplished by providing a better way for defining maven executions and<br> providing fine grained control over the execution of the Maven Lifecycle. 

## Features

- Allows running entire `Lifecycles`/`Phases` with a specific `Execution` context
<br>ex: deploy with `Execution` context for CICD-Pipeline use `deploy@pipeline`
<br>ex: if no `Execution` context is specified the default `Execution` context is used: `install` == `install@default`
- Allows running select `Phases` without implicitly executing all prerequisites
<br>ex: deploy (for example to a secondary repo) `[deploy]`
- Allows exclusion of select `Phases` on execution
<br>ex: install without testing: `]test[,install`
- Provides `Modes` for selecting which set of `Goals` is executed per `Phase`
<br>ex: install in development mode `dev/install` vs install in default mode `install` or `default/install`
- Provides `help` Lifecycle
- Provides Gui enhancements (can be disabled)
- Plugin Configurations are inherited by per Plugin Execution Configurations (inside pom.xml)
- All configurations are stored outside the maven pom to avoid bloat
  - Executions can be customized with the `pem.xml` file
  - The order of Goals inside a Phase can be customized with the `grm.xml` file
- `Execution` contexts can be automatically triggered ...
  - always
  - default (active if no other `Execution` is called for)
  - on <ins>active</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>inactive</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>provided</ins> `Profile`
  - on <ins>missing</ins> `Profile`
- `Execution` contexts can be restricted via ...
  - "packaging procedures" (whatever is set as the `packaging` in `pom.xml`)
  - "properties" (allows matching by existance, `equals`, `equals-ignore-case`, `regex`; `invert` of the statement)
- Provides logging of all loaded Maven-Extensions (and their states)
- Provides `setup` goal to simplify installation into maven-project
- Provides goals to dump the current configuration (in case you want to redefine everything, so you don't need to start from scratch)
- Provides debug goals
- Configurations (`pem.xml` & `grm.xml`) are loaded from all active plugins therefore Workflow Plugins can be used for easier project setup
  - RunedUniverse provides example Workflow Plugins for use with Jenkins-Plugins, Spring and normal Java Projects.
- Provides Configuration options for Runes4Maven Features (see [Properties](#properties))
- Built to be extendable by other Maven Core-Extensions

## Installation
Runes4Maven (r4m) can be installed in two major ways:

### Maven Core-Extension
Runes4Maven (r4m) installed as a Maven Core-Extensions exposes r4m's full potential.

Core-Extensions are installed in the project by adding them in the `extensions.xml`. This has to be located in the `.mvn` folder which has to be in the root folder of your maven project per [maven definition](https://maven.apache.org/configure.html#mvn-extensions-xml-file).

#### Automatic Install
To automatically install the `r4m-maven-extension`, execute the `setup` maven goal in the project folder:

```bash
mvn net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m:r4m-maven-extension:setup
```

#### Manual Install
> just place following file in the `.mvn` folder your projects root directory!

`.mvn/extensions.xml`

```xml
<extensions xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/EXTENSIONS/1.0.0"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/EXTENSIONS/1.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/core-extensions-1.0.0.xsd">
    <extension>
        <groupId>net.runeduniverse.tools.maven.r4m</groupId>
        <artifactId>r4m-maven-extension</artifactId>
        <version>1.1.0</version>
    </extension>
</extensions>
```


### Maven Build-Extension

> [!CAUTION]
> We received reports that on some Maven versions past our min. supported version of `3.3.9` an essential class does not get provided to **Build-Extensions** anymore, which leads to Maven crashing in it's entirety!
> <br><br>
> **Therefore we urge you to load r4m as a [Core-Extension](#maven-core-extension)!**

You theoretically could use r4m as a Build-Extension,
some features may not be available in this mode and it will print a sizable warning!

To configure r4m as a build-extension, configure this extension as a plugin and set `<extensions>` flag to `true`.

(see [Maven Guide Example for Build-Extensions](https://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-using-extensions.html#build-extension)).


## Goals

Goal | Description
---|---
`r4m:help` | Prints the help-page
`r4m:help-tasks` | Prints goal/lifecycle tasks help-page. It describes how the new build argument 'lifecycle-tasks' works.
`r4m:gen-full-pem` | Discovers all loaded Executions which influence the current project build lifecycles. Discovered Executions will be condensed as much as possible and written to the `full-pem.xml` file in the defined build directory.
`r4m:gen-rel-pem` | Discovers all loaded Executions which are relevant to and influence the current project build lifecycles. Discovered Executions will be condensed as much as possible and written to the `rel-pem.xml` file in the defined build directory.
`r4m:status` | Shows the status of all r4m features.
`r4m:setup` | Configures the r4m-maven-extension as a Core-Extension.
`r4m:help-debug` | Prints the debug help-page.<br>It lists debug goals & properties which can help trace unexpected problems.
`r4m:debug-show-pem-archive` | Prints all registered PEMs.<br>The PEMs are logged as parsed, no selection has occurred!
`r4m:debug-show-grm-archive` | Prints all registered GRMs.<br>The GRMs are logged as parsed, no selection has occurred!



## Properties

Property | Default | Options | Description
---|---|---|---
`r4m.active-profiles-inheritance` | `upstream` | `upstream`, `top-level`, `false` | This property defines whether active profiles are inherited when running single modules (defined via `-pl <module>`) inside a multi-module-maven project. Since by default profiles activated via cli (`-P<profile>`) only apply to the top-level project.
`r4m.fancy-output` | `true` | `true`, `false` | Some help goals output "fancy" styled text which gets removed when logging. These goals will log in an alternate way when set to `false`.
`r4m.generate-plugin-executions` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This property defines whether missing active executions can be auto-generated. For further information see [Issue #5](https://github.com/RunedUniverse/r4m-maven-extension/issues/5#issuecomment-1618743363).
`r4m.generate-plugin-executions-on-fork` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This property defines whether missing active executions can be auto-generated when forking. For further information see [Issue #5](https://github.com/RunedUniverse/r4m-maven-extension/issues/5#issuecomment-1618743363).
`r4m.lifecycle-task-request-calculator` | `sequential` | `declared`, `sequential` | This property defines how lifecycle-tasks without modifiers get interpreted. Option `declared`   -> `<phase>` => `[<phase>]` vs option `sequential` -> `<phase>` =>  `<phase>]`.
`r4m.lifecycle-task-request-calculator-on-fork` | `sequential` | `declared`, `sequential` | This property defines how Maven default based goal forks, defining an `execute-phase`, get interpreted. Option `declared`   -> `<phase>` => `[<phase>]` vs option `sequential` -> `<phase>` =>  `<phase>]`.
`r4m.missing-build-plugin-handler` | `warn` | `skip`, `warn`, `scan`, `download` | This property defines how active goals without an active plugin definition should get handled. In case you have a plugin which requires a secondary "missing/undefined" plugin you may set this property to `scan` or `download` but be warned this slows down operation significantly. Furthermore in case you have a maven-plugin which has a secondary plugin bundled you can forceload the secondary plugin by setting this property to `scan` but again this slows down operation significantly and is **not** recommended. Please just define all required plugins!
`r4m.patch-mojo-on-fork` | `true` | `true`, `false` | This defines whether the mojos during fork can be rewritten. This 'fixes' the gui but may break other plugins which might rely on that variable downstream.
`r4m.debug.dump-grm-entries-before-execution` | `reduced` | `all`, `reduced` | Defines the level of detail, when logging the grm-selection, pre task-execution in debug mode (`-X`).


---

## Insights

Maven hides a bunch of very useful options under the hood. Additionally the Executions feature is very powerful but can be quite a hussle to configure correctly. Furthermore Maven does not provide an option to just launch one phase which might include only goals that don't require any prerequisites.

Runes4Maven (r4m) reworks two core features and adds ease of life features.
1. Activating Executions for entire lifecycle-tasks (phases)
2. Specific declaration of which phases are to run.
3. Which executions get activated?
4. Which Goals are included in which execution?
5. Selecting Goals through 'modes'
6. Where exactly is the goal order (inside a phase) defined?!
7. Help Lifecycle

---

### Lifecycle Tasks Rework [1-3]
When running Maven you append goal/lifecycle tasks to the Maven command 'mvn'.

Maven already provides the goal tasks in following style - as such they are unchanged:

`<plugin-prefix>:<goal>[@<execution>]` or `<plugin-group-id>:<plugin-artifact-id>[:<plugin-version>]:<goal>[@<execution>]`


Runes4Maven (r4m) further reworked the Lifecycle Tasks which allow following style:

`[<modes>/]<lifecycle-tasks>[@<executions>]`

##### &lt;modes&gt;
Modes are a comma separated list of active modes. By default the modes `default` and `dev` are available but you may define others within the pem.xml config.

##### &lt;lifecycle-tasks&gt;
Lifecycle Tasks are a comma separated list of active lifecycle-phases. Every Lifecycle Phase may have one additional modifier before and/or after it:

`]` or `[` `<phase>` `]` or `[`

**Modifiers**

```
   ']' before the phase:
       select all phases before the phase excluding the phase itself
   '[' before the phase:
       select all phases after the phase including the phase itself
   ']' after the phase:
       select all phases before the phase including the phase itself
   '[' after the phase:
       select all phases after the phase excluding the phase itself
```

##### &lt;executions&gt;
Executions are a comma separated list of active executions.

#### Examples

Install everything without running tests in 'dev' mode:

`dev/]test[,install]`

Run all the tests without recompiling, with the 'pipeline' execution:

`[test]@pipeline`

Package the project with the custom defined modes 'my-mode' & 'my-test-mode' and executions 'pipeline' & 'test':

`my-mode,my-test-mode/package]@pipeline,test`

---

### Project Execution Model (PEM) [4-5]
The Project Execution Model `pem.xml` can be used to override all inherited default executions and specify specific triggers, restrictions and modes for your specific usecase.
We strongly recommend not to write the PEM from scratch but to generate the currently active configuration. This can be done by running `r4m:gen-full-pem` to generate to full PEM usually around 700-1000 lines (yes Maven does inject a ton of configuration), we recommend to generate only the relevant PEM for your usecase by running `r4m:gen-rel-pem`.
Please keep in mind that the relevant PEM of the root project of a multi-module-maven project only includes the config of the root project.

The `pem.xml` has the schema header shown below, allowing you to speed up writing it with an adequate IDE (Eclipse/Intellij).

```xml
<project-execution-model
    xmlns="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem 
    https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-pem-v1_1_0.xsd">

    <modelVersion>1.1.0</modelVersion>
    <executions>
        ...
    </executions>
</project-execution-model>
```

**Execution**

Every Execution defined in the PEM can have multiple triggers. Currently following triggers are available - other core-extensions may define additional triggers:

`always`, `never`, `default`, `on-call` (this is always active), `active-profile`, `inactive-profile`, `provided-profile`, `missing-profile`


Every Execution defined in the PEM can have multiple restrictions, once a restriction type is defined at least one of those definitions has to be fulfilled. Currently following restriction is available - other core-extensions may define additional restrictions:

`packaging-procedure`, `property`

**Goal**

Every Goal in the PEM has to have at least one mode. By default the modes `default` and `dev` are preconfigured. This can be changed inside the `pem.xml`.

**What might I use modes for?** With modes you can have two seperate 'modes' of one execution, for example you can make it so that a formatting goal only runs in 'dev' mode and not during normal operation.

**Override**

Every PEM can optionally declare "Overrides". When a PEM declares an Override it changes which PEM's are included in processing.

> [!TIP]
> Overrides can be used to disable inheritance of PEM files!

> [!WARNING]
> We recommend against using Overrides in PEMs which are bundled in plugins!<br>
> Runes4Maven will print a **Warning** when it discovers *dangerous* overrides like `declare-super-pem`,
> as we consider the use of this features in this case to be very hard to debug!

Override | Description | Important Information
---|---|---
`declare-super-pem` | Declares this file as 'super-pem' which disables all pem files, which do not declare 'super-pem' status themself. The user-defined pem.xml file in the project folder can never be excluded! | Once a PEM, declaring 'super-pem status', is discovered in a project the inheritance tree stopps at that (parent-)project! All PEMs further up the tree will be skipped!
`disable-super-pom` | By disableing the 'super-pom' all default goal declarations enforced by maven are disabled. | 

---

### Goal Requirement Model [6]
The Goal Requirement Model `grm.xml` can be used to define the order of goals. Strictly speaking this feature should not be required as Maven expects that all goals in the same phase can be executed in any order.
Sadly this is not always the case therefore we need a way to declare an order. By default this order, is the order in which the plugins are declared in the `pom.xml`, therefore the default way gets complicated very fast especially when considering project inheritance, PEM's and Workflow Plugins.

```xml
<goal-requirement-model
    xmlns="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-grm"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="https://api.runeduniverse.net/runes4tools/r4m-grm r4m-grm-v1_0_0.xsd">

    <modelVersion>1.0.0</modelVersion>
    <goals>
        ...
    </goals>
</goal-requirement-model>
```

---

### Help Lifecycle [7]
Runes4Maven (r4m) provides the help lifecycle. With this the cmd `mvn help` is finally viable. Runes4Maven does **not** crawl build-plugins to attach their help goals to the `help` lifecycle.

But we recommend every build-plugin developer to attach their help goals to this lifecycle. In case the default Maven way does not work for you, we recommend you to include a `pem.xml` file with the same syntax as the PEM in your jar under the path `META-INF/r4m/pem.xml` and set the execution `source` field to `plugin`. You may of course also attach all your other goals to lifecycles in the same way.
